Table of contentsTitle PageCopyrightDeep Learning Demystified: A Step-by-Step Introduction to Neural NetworksChapter 1Chapter 2Chapter 3Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6Chapter 7Chapter 8About The Author GuideCoverBeginningTable of Contents 12345678910111213141516171819202122232425262728293031323334353637383940414243444546474849505152535455565758596061626364656667686970717273747576777879808182838485868788 Deep Learning Demystified A Step-by-Step Introduction to Neural Networks Kilho Shin, PhD Copyright © 2024 Kilho Shin All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means—electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording, or otherwise—without the prior written permission of the publisher, except for the use of brief quotations in a book review.Disclaimer: The information provided in this book is for educational purposes only. The author and publisher make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. The author and publisher shall not be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.Trademarks: All trademarks, service marks, product names, and logos appearing in this book are the property of their respective owners.For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact fusionlab.ai@gmail.com. Author’s Note Dear Reader, Welcome to "Deep Learning Demystified: A Step-by-Step Introduction to Neural Networks." My name is Kilho Shin, and I am thrilled to have you join me on this exciting journey into the world of artificial intelligence. As someone who has dedicated years to studying and working in AI, I know how challenging it can be to grasp these complex concepts. My goal with this book is to make learning neural networks accessible, enjoyable, and rewarding for everyone, regardless of their background. Throughout this book, I have strived to break down complicated ideas into manageable steps, provide practical examples, and share insights from my own experiences. Whether you are a student, a professional, or simply an enthusiast eager to learn, I hope you find this book helpful and inspiring. Remember, the key to mastering neural networks lies in curiosity, persistence, and practice. Don't be afraid to experiment, ask questions, and seek out additional resources. The field of AI is constantly evolving, and there is always something new to learn. Thank you for choosing this book as your guide. I am excited to be a part of your learning journey and look forward to seeing the amazing things you will achieve with your newfound knowledge. Happy learning! Best regards, Kilho Shin, PhD Who This Book Is For This book is for anyone who wants to understand the basics of neural networks and deep learning. Whether you are a student, a professional, or a hobbyist, this book is designed to help you grasp the foundational concepts of neural networks. If you have little to no prior knowledge of artificial intelligence but are eager to learn, this book will provide you with the necessary tools and understanding to start your journey. Additionally, if you already have some experience with machine learning and want to deepen your knowledge of neural networks, this book will offer valuable insights and practical knowledge. About This Book This book is designed to provide a step-by-step introduction to neural networks, focusing on making complex topics easy to understand. It covers the fundamental concepts and mathematics behind artificial neural networks, including gradient descent and backpropagation, and explains them in a straightforward and accessible way. Whether you are a beginner in the field of AI or someone looking to deepen your understanding, this book aims to guide you through the basics and build a strong foundation for more advanced studies. Through clear explanations and practical examples, you will learn how neural networks work and how to implement them, making the seemingly complicated world of deep learning approachable and enjoyable. Deep Learning Demystified: A Step-by-Step Introduction to Neural Networks Contents Chapter 1: Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks and Perceptrons 1.1 The Dream of Artificial Intelligence 1.2 Basic Concepts of Artificial Neural Networks Chapter 2: Neurons and Artificial Neurons 2.1 Structure and Function of Neurons 2.2 Structure and Function of Artificial Neurons 2.3 Perceptron 2.4 Summary Chapter 3: Perceptron Learning Algorithm 3.1 Learning Process of Artificial Neural Networks 3.2 Learning Algorithm Example 3.3 Simple Perceptron example in Python with detailed comments 3.4 Summary Chapter 4: Limitations of Perceptron and Multi-Layer Neural Networks 4.1 Perceptron as a Linear Classifier 4.2 The Rise of Multi-layer Neural Networks 4.3 Structure of Multi-layer Neural Networks 4.4 Summary Chapter 5: Activation Functions 5.1 Limitations of the Step Function 5.2 Sigmoid Function Vanishing Gradient Problem Non Zero-Centered Problem 5.3 Hyperbolic Tangent Function (tanh Function) 5.4 ReLU Activation Function Dying ReLU Problem 5.5 Leaky ReLU (Leaky Rectified Linear Unit) 5.6 PReLU (Parametric Rectified Linear Unit) 5.7 ELU (Exponential Linear Unit) 5.8 Summary Chapter 6: Gradient Descent 6.1 Definition of Gradient Descent 6.2 Loss Function MSE (Mean Squared Error) MAE (Mean Absolute Error) Cross Entropy 6.3 Gradient Descent Definition of Gradient Descent Mathematical Expression 6.4 Summary Chapter 7: Backpropagation Algorithm 7.1 Background of Backpropagation Algorithm 7.2 Necessity of the Backpropagation Algorithm 7.3 Backpropagation Step1: Forward Pass Step 2: Loss Calculation Step 3: Backpropagation 7.4 Backpropagation Example Code 7.5 Summary Chapter 8. Applications of Neural Networks 8.1 Examples of Neural Network Applications in Various Fields Image Recognition Speech Recognition Natural Language Processing, NLP 8.2 Real-life Cases AlphaGo Facebook Face Recognition Google Translate 8.3 Conclusion and Future Challenges Chapter 1 Introduction to Artificial Neural Networks and Perceptrons 1.1 The Dream of Artificial Intelligence For a long time, humans have dreamed of creating machines that can think and communicate like people. This vision of artificial intelligence has been a cornerstone of science fiction for decades, inspiring countless stories and imaginations. The concept of intelligent machines can be traced back to ancient myths and legends, but it wasn't until the mid-20th century that the field of artificial intelligence (AI) began to take shape as a scientific discipline. The dream of AI is now becoming a reality, driven by rapid advancements in technology and a deeper understanding of how the human brain functions. AI encompasses a broad range of technologies, including natural language processing, computer vision, robotics, and more. However, at its core, AI relies heavily on Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning. These technologies enable computers to learn from data, identify patterns, and make decisions with minimal human intervention. Machine Learning is a subset of AI that focuses on developing algorithms that allow computers to learn from and make predictions based on data. This approach has revolutionized how we interact with technology, from personalized recommendations on streaming services to sophisticated fraud detection systems in finance. Yet, as powerful as Machine Learning is, it is the advent of Deep Learning that has truly propelled AI to new heights. Deep Learning, a specialized subset of Machine Learning, is a technology that learns complex patterns and structures from vast amounts of data. It involves the use of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), which are designed to mimic the structure and function of the human brain. These networks consist of layers of interconnected nodes, or neurons, that process information in a way similar to how biological neurons operate. Deep Learning models, through their multiple layers, can capture intricate patterns and representations in data, making them exceptionally powerful for tasks such as image and speech recognition, natural language processing, and autonomous driving. The impact of Deep Learning on AI has been profound. It has enabled significant breakthroughs in various fields, including healthcare, where it is used to analyze medical images and predict disease outcomes, and in autonomous systems, where it helps in navigation and decision-making processes. The ability of Deep Learning models to learn from unstructured data, such as images, text, and audio, has opened up new possibilities for AI applications that were previously unimaginable. To understand Deep Learning, we first need to delve into the concept of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). ANNs are the foundation of Deep Learning and are computer models inspired by the neural networks in the human brain. Just as the human brain consists of billions of neurons that communicate through electrical and chemical signals, ANNs consist of artificial neurons that process and transmit information through mathematical operations. Each neuron in an ANN receives one or more inputs, processes them using an activation function, and produces an output that is passed on to other neurons in subsequent layers. The connections between neurons are weighted, and these weights are adjusted during the learning process to minimize errors and improve the model's performance. This process, known as training, involves feeding the network large amounts of data and using optimization algorithms to fine-tune the weights. The architecture of ANNs can vary significantly depending on the application. Simple networks with a single layer of neurons are called single-layer perceptrons, while more complex networks with multiple layers are known as multi-layer perceptrons or Deep Neural Networks (DNNs). The latter are capable of learning hierarchical representations of data, where each layer captures increasingly abstract features. Understanding ANNs is the first step in understanding Deep Learning and an important starting point for creating AI. By studying how these networks function and how they can be trained to perform specific tasks, we gain insights into the mechanisms that drive modern AI systems. This knowledge not only helps us build more sophisticated models but also enables us to innovate and push the boundaries of what AI can achieve. In summary, the dream of AI is rooted in the desire to create machines that can emulate human intelligence and perform complex tasks autonomously. Machine Learning and Deep Learning are at the heart of this endeavor, with ANNs providing the essential framework for building powerful AI models. As we continue to explore and refine these technologies, we move closer to realizing the full potential of AI and transforming our world in ways we can only begin to imagine. 1.2 Basic Concepts of Artificial Neural Networks Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) are models designed to mimic the human brain. The brain has a complex structure and function, but its basic unit is quite simple. This basic unit is called a neuron. The human brain contains about 100 billion neurons, which are interconnected to process and transmit information. A neuron consists of three main parts: the dendrite, the soma, and the axon. The dendrite receives input from other neurons. The soma processes this information, and if the signal strength exceeds a certain threshold, it fires an electrical impulse. The axon then transmits this impulse to the next neuron. Neurons communicate with each other at junctions called synapses, where the transmission of information occurs. Artificial neurons are designed to mimic these functions. They receive input signals, perform calculations, and generate output signals. Multiple artificial neurons form an artificial neural network, which can process various inputs, learn from them, and solve complex problems. The basic structure of an artificial neural network includes an input layer, hidden layers, and an output layer. The input layer receives data from the outside world. The hidden layers process this data, extracting important features and transforming them into intermediate results. The output layer converts these intermediate results into the final output, such as predictions or classifications. Connections between neurons are represented by weights, which are adjusted during the learning process. Learning involves using a dataset to make predictions and measuring the difference between the predictions and the actual values using a loss function. The goal is to minimize this loss by adjusting the weights, typically using an optimization algorithm like gradient descent. By repeating this process, the neural network becomes increasingly accurate in its predictions. Activation functions are also a crucial element of neural networks. They determine the output of a neuron and introduce non-linearity, enabling the network to learn complex patterns. Common activation functions include the sigmoid function, the hyperbolic tangent function (tanh), and the rectified linear unit (ReLU). Each function has its unique characteristics, and choosing the right one is essential for specific tasks. Neural networks are applied in various fields, providing innovative solutions. They are used in image recognition, speech recognition, natural language processing, autonomous driving, and medical diagnosis. For instance, in the medical field, neural networks analyze X-ray images to detect cancer early or predict disease progression by analyzing patient history data, aiding healthcare professionals in diagnosis and treatment planning. In conclusion, artificial neural networks are powerful tools that mimic the human brain to solve complex problems. Understanding the structure and function of neurons and how to design and train neural networks is fundamental to grasping deep learning. The development of neural networks is expanding the possibilities of artificial intelligence, leading to continuous innovation and advancements. Chapter 2 Neurons and Artificial Neurons 2.1 Structure and Function of Neurons The human brain is composed of approximately 100 billion neurons. Although the structure and function of the brain are exceedingly complex, the basic unit that makes up this intricate system is relatively simple. This fundamental unit is called a neuron. Neurons play crucial roles in receiving inputs, processing information, and transmitting outputs. Neurons can be divided into three main parts: Dendrite: Dendrites are the input parts of the neuron. They receive signals from other neurons. Dendrites branch out like tree branches, allowing them to connect with many other neurons and receive numerous signals. Soma (Cell Body): The soma is the central part of the neuron. It processes the signals received by the dendrites. The soma integrates the incoming signals, and if the combined signal strength exceeds a certain threshold, it triggers an electrical impulse. This process is known as firing. Axon: The axon is the output part of the neuron. It transmits the processed signal from the soma to other neurons. The axon extends from the soma and can be quite long, reaching different parts of the body. At its end, the axon branches out to form connections with the dendrites of other neurons, creating a structure known as a synapse. The transmission of signals between neurons occurs at the synapse. A synapse is a junction where the axon terminal of one neuron meets the dendrite of another. When an electrical impulse reaches the end of an axon, it triggers the release of neurotransmitters, which are chemical messengers. These neurotransmitters cross the synaptic gap and bind to receptors on the dendrites of the receiving neuron. This binding converts the chemical signal back into an electrical impulse in the receiving neuron, allowing the signal to continue its journey. This process of signal transmission is extremely rapid and precise, enabling the brain to process vast amounts of information and perform a wide range of functions. For example, when you touch a hot surface, sensory neurons in your skin send signals to your brain, which then processes this information and quickly sends a signal through motor neurons to your muscles to pull your hand away. This entire process happens almost instantaneously, showcasing the remarkable efficiency and speed of neuronal communication. Neurons are also capable of forming complex networks. Through learning and experience, the connections between neurons can strengthen or weaken, a property known as synaptic plasticity. This ability to change and adapt is fundamental to learning, memory, and overall brain function. It allows the brain to store information, learn new skills, and adapt to new situations. In summary, the neuron, despite its simplicity, is a highly efficient and essential component of the brain's function. Its structure, consisting of dendrites, soma, and axon, enables it to receive, process, and transmit information rapidly. The synapse plays a critical role in neuron-to-neuron communication, ensuring that signals are transmitted accurately and swiftly across the neural network. This intricate system of neurons working together allows the brain to perform complex tasks, from basic reflexes to higher-order cognitive functions such as thinking, learning, and memory. 2.2 Structure and Function of Artificial Neurons Artificial neurons are computer models that mimic the information processing of biological neurons. Artificial neurons receive inputs, perform calculations based on these inputs, and generate outputs. When multiple artificial neurons are combined, they form an artificial neural network (ANN), which can process various input data, learn from it, and solve complex problems. To understand how an artificial neuron works, let’s look at a simple example. Suppose an artificial neuron receives three inputs and calculates a threshold to determine the output. Let the inputs be , , and , and the weights (which act like synapses) be , , and . The neuron calculates a node value using these inputs and weights and then determines the output. For example, if the input values are , , and , and the weights are , , and , the output value is calculated as follows: So, the output value is 0.69. Just as a biological neuron fires when the input value exceeds a certain threshold, an artificial neuron also sets a threshold (here, 0.5) to decide whether to fire. The activation function is a function that determines the output value based on the input value. Among several activation functions, the step function is used here: it outputs 1 if the input value is above the threshold and 0 otherwise. For example, if the calculated node value is 0.69 and the threshold is 0.5, the output value is 1. 2.3 Perceptron The perceptron is an artificial neural network model based on the work of neurophysiologist McCulloch and computational neuroscientist Pitts in 1943. It was implemented by psychologist Rosenblatt in 1958. The perceptron is a simple form of an artificial neuron and serves as the foundation for all deep learning models. It works by summing the weighted inputs and passing the result through an activation function to produce an output. The learning method of a perceptron is straightforward. If the output differs from the actual value, it calculates the error and adjusts the weights accordingly. By repeating this process, the perceptron optimizes the weights, allowing it to produce correct outputs for given inputs. 2.4 Summary A neuron is the basic unit of the human brain, consisting of dendrites that receive input, a soma that processes signals, and an axon that transmits output. Neurons communicate through synapses, and this information processing mechanism is mimicked by artificial neurons. Artificial neurons generate outputs based on input values and weights. The perceptron is a simple form of an artificial neuron, calculating output by summing weighted inputs and applying an activation function. It learns by adjusting weights to minimize the error between the actual and predicted outputs. This basic principle of artificial neural networks forms the foundation of deep learning. Chapter 3 Perceptron Learning Algorithm 3.1 Learning Process of Artificial Neural Networks The perceptron learning algorithm, though relatively simple, forms the foundation for learning algorithms in deep learning models. Learning involves adjusting the weights to produce the desired output. When the neural network's output differs from the actual value, this difference is called the error. To minimize the error, the weights are adjusted accordingly. The learning process of a perceptron consists of the following steps: Initialization: Initialize the weights with random values. Output Calculation: Calculate the output using the input values and the initial weights. Error Calculation: Compute the error by finding the difference between the output and the actual value (true label). Weight Update: Adjust the weights to minimize the error using the following formula: Here, is the learning rate, which controls the magnitude of weight changes. is the actual value, is the predicted value, and is the input value. Repetition: Repeat the above steps until the error is sufficiently small and the weights are optimized. By following these steps, the perceptron adjusts its weights to produce the correct outputs for given inputs, thereby learning from the data. 3.2 Learning Algorithm Example Let's explore the perceptron learning algorithm through a weather prediction problem. Suppose that if there are no clouds and the wind is weak in the morning, the day will be sunny. Conversely, if there are many clouds and strong wind, it will rain. We will represent the amount of clouds and the strength of the wind on a scale from 0 to 1. We will use a dataset that records the wind strength, cloud amount, and the weather for each day. Our task is to create a perceptron that can predict whether it will be sunny or rainy based on the wind strength and cloud amount. Consider a perceptron with two inputs: the amount of clouds () and the strength of the wind (). Suppose the inputs are (clouds) and (wind), and the initial weights are . The output of the perceptron is calculated as follows: The output is 0.36, which does not exceed the threshold of 0.5, so the output is 0 (indicating a sunny day). However, if the actual weather label is 1 (indicating a rainy day), the error is calculated as follows: Based on this error, we update the weights. Assuming a learning rate () of 0.01, the weight update is performed as follows: Similarly, we update : This process is repeated until the error is sufficiently minimized and the weights are optimized. By repeating this learning process for all data, will approximate 0.5, and will also approximate 0.5. This way, the perceptron learns to produce the correct output for the given inputs through the training process. 3.3 Simple Perceptron example in Python with detailed comments import numpy as npimport matplotlib.pyplot as pltfrom matplotlib.animation import FuncAnimation# Step function for binary classificationdef step_function(x, threshold): return 1 if x >= threshold else 0# Generate training datadef gen_training_data(data_points): x1 = np.random.random(data_points) x2 = np.random.random(data_points) y = ((x1 + x2) > 1).astype(int) # Points above the line x1 + x2 = 1 are labeled 1, others 0 return [((x1[i], x2[i]), y[i]) for i in range(len(x1))]# Perceptron training function with animationdef perceptron_animation(data_points=100, epochs=10, learning_rate=0.1, threshold=0.5): global w w = np.array([0.3, 0.9]) # Initial weights training_set = gen_training_data(data_points)fig, ax = plt.subplots() plt.ylim((-0.1, 1.1)) plt.xlim((-0.1, 1.1)) ax.set_aspect('equal', adjustable='box') xx = np.linspace(0, 1, 50)# Plotting training data points for x, y in training_set: if y == 1: plt.plot(x[0], x[1], 'bo') # Class 1 else: plt.plot(x[0], x[1], 'go') # Class 0line, = ax.plot([], [], 'r-')def update(epoch): global w for x, y in training_set: u = np.dot(x, w) error = y - step_function(u, threshold) w += learning_rate * error * np.array(x) # Update weightsyy = -w[1] / w[0] * xx + threshold / w[0] # Decision boundary equation line.set_data(xx, yy) return line,ani = FuncAnimation(fig, update, frames=range(epochs), blit=True, repeat=False) plt.show()# Main functionif __name__ == '__main__': perceptron_animation() Code Explanation: This code visualizes a simple example of binary classification using the perceptron algorithm. step_function: Defines a simple step function for binary classification. It returns 1 if the given value is greater than the specified threshold, otherwise returns 0. gen_training_data: Generates training data for the given number of data points. x1 and x2 are randomly generated, and y is labeled as 1 if their sum is greater than 1, otherwise labeled as 0. perceptron_animation: Trains the perceptron algorithm with the training data and visualizes the process through animation. Initial weights are randomly chosen. It iterates through the training data for each epoch, updating the weights and decision boundary to visualize the learning process. Main function: Calls the perceptron_animation function to execute. This code demonstrates the process of classifying data with two features using a simple perceptron, showing how the decision boundary adjusts visually as the learning progresses. 3.4 Summary The Perceptron learning algorithm explains how to adjust the weights (connection strengths) in the learning process of an artificial neural network to obtain the desired output. The learning process consists of weight initialization, output calculation, error calculation, and weight update steps, which are repeated to minimize the error. For example, in a weather prediction problem, the output is calculated using input values (clouds and wind strength) and initial weights, and the weights are updated based on the error with the actual values. By repeating this process, the weights are optimized to generate the correct output for the input values. The Perceptron learning algorithm forms the foundation of deep learning models and plays an essential role in solving complex problems. Chapter 4 Limitations of Perceptron and Multi-Layer Neural Networks In the previous discussion, we explored the structure and functionality of the Perceptron. While the Perceptron performs well in predicting weather, it also has clear limitations. In this chapter, we will examine these limitations and how to overcome them. 4.1 Perceptron as a Linear Classifier The Perceptron is a linear classifier, meaning it works well for data that can be separated by a straight line (or a plane in higher dimensions). This is useful when the input data can be linearly separated into two classes. In Chapter 3, we learned about the Perceptron that linearly classifies sunny and rainy weather based on cloud amount and wind strength plotted on a 2D plane. With sufficient training data, we found that, and approach values around 0.5. When plotted on a plane as a linear function, it serves as a linear classifier that separates the two spaces. Thus, if the dataset on a 2D plane can be divided by a single line, the Perceptron can learn to adjust the weights to classify any dataset effectively Moreover, the Perceptron is theoretically applicable to higher-dimensional data. Each input value corresponds to one dimension of data. For instance, a Perceptron with two inputs handles 2D data as a linear classifier. If it has three inputs, it becomes a linear classifier for a 3D space, and with inputs, it classifies -dimensional hyperplanes. Even as the Perceptron dimensions increase, the method for deriving results remains the same. It sums the weighted inputs and produces an output. This process can be expressed mathematically as follows: Here, is the weight for each input , and is the bias (though we omitted the bias in previous examples for simplicity, it is included in actual neural networks). The output is determined after passing through an activation function, commonly a step function for Perceptrons. The step function outputs 1 if the input value exceeds a certain threshold and 0 otherwise. 4.2 The Rise of Multi-layer Neural Networks Despite these features, the Perceptron has clear limitations. It cannot solve problems where the data is not linearly separable, like the XOR problem. The XOR problem is a classic example where the output is 1 if the inputs are different and 0 if they are the same, which a single-layer Perceptron cannot solve. The Perceptron’s limitations do not stop there. It can only work with linearly separable data, but many real-world problems involve nonlinear data patterns. Therefore, the Perceptron alone is insufficient for solving complex problems. In 1969, psychologists Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert proved mathematically in their book "Perceptrons" that while a Perceptron can solve AND, OR, and NOR gates, it cannot solve the XOR gate. This led to a decline in neural network research during the 1970s as interest waned. However, some researchers believed in the potential of neural networks and continued their work. Notable figures include David Rumelhart, Geoffrey Hinton, and Ronald Williams. Their research led to the development of Multi-layer Neural Networks, which marked a turning point in neural network research. 4.3 Structure of Multi-layer Neural Networks A Multi-layer Neural Network consists of an input layer, one or more hidden layers, and an output layer. The more hidden layers there are, the more complex data the network can process. Multi-layer networks can solve problems that cannot be linearly separated, which is the fundamental concept of deep learning. More layers make the network deeper, hence the term "deep learning." Intuitively, while a single line cannot classify some datasets, multiple lines can. By connecting multiple Perceptrons and adding more layers, a Multi-layer Neural Network can handle non-linear problems. Each layer extracts different features from the input data, and these features combine to form the final output. So, the core idea of multi-layer neural networks is to use multiple layers to gradually transform the input data and introduce non-linearity through hidden layers, allowing the network to learn complex patterns. Each hidden layer extracts specific features from the input data, and these features combine to produce the final output. For instance, in recognizing handwritten digits, the first hidden layer might extract basic lines and curves, the second layer might combine these to form shapes, and the final layer recognizes the digit. Multi-layer Neural Networks learn through backpropagation, which adjusts the weights to minimize the error between the predicted and actual outputs. 4.4 Summary The Perceptron is useful as a linear classifier but has limitations with non-linear problems like the XOR problem. To overcome these limitations, Multi-layer Neural Networks were developed, consisting of input, hidden, and output layers. These networks transform input data through multiple layers, introducing non-linearity to learn complex patterns. For example, in handwritten digit recognition, different layers extract various levels of features, leading to accurate digit recognition. Learning in Multi-layer Neural Networks is achieved through backpropagation, adjusting weights to minimize prediction errors, allowing them to solve complex problems. Chapter 5 Activation Functions 5.1 Limitations of the Step Function In the previous chapter, we introduced the step function as an activation function. The step function outputs 0 if the input is below a certain threshold and 1 if it is above that threshold, making it a nonlinear function. However, this function has a critical drawback: it does not provide a way to measure the degree of error. A perceptron operates by receiving input values, and if these values surpass a certain threshold, the perceptron fires. The step function offers a simple form of non-linearity by outputting 1 if the input sum exceeds 0.5 and 0 otherwise. While this simplicity helps in understanding the basic concept of perceptrons, it creates several issues during the learning process. Let’s discuss an example from the previous chapter. When a perceptron with an internal value of 0.36 uses the step function, the output is 0. After updating the weights and using the same input values, the internal value changes to 0.37, which is closer to the threshold of 0.5. However, due to the step function’s nature, values below the threshold all produce an output of 0. Therefore, whether the internal value is 0.36 or 0.37, the output remains 0. In more extreme cases, internal values such as 0.001 or 0.4999 will still result in an output of 0. Clearly, 0.4999 is a better prediction than 0.001, but this difference is ignored, and both are considered equally erroneous with an error of 1. 5.2 Sigmoid Function Let’s start by looking at the sigmoid function. The sigmoid function has an S-shaped curve, making it smoother than the step function. The mathematical formula for the sigmoid function is: One of the main advantages of the sigmoid function is that it can represent differences in internal values, which the step function cannot. The sigmoid outputs values between 0 and 1 based on the input value. This range allows for more nuanced error calculations compared to the binary output of the step function. The sigmoid function can also transform internal values of a neural network into probabilities. For example, if the output value is 0.8, it can be interpreted as the network predicting a certain class with an 80% probability. Additionally, the sigmoid function normalizes the input values, ensuring that each node's output falls between 0 and 1. This helps stabilize the neural network and aids in the convergence during the learning process. Vanishing Gradient Problem The sigmoid function is certainly an improvement over the step function, but it also has some notable weaknesses. The most significant issue is that the gradient (slope) of the function approaches zero at both ends of the curve. This is one of the primary drawbacks of the sigmoid activation function. But why is having a gradient close to zero at the extremes problematic? The reason is that, as you can see here, even if the input values change significantly, the difference in output values is minimal. This is a problem similar to the one seen with the step function. With the step function, whether the input is 0.499 or 0.001, the output is 0. In other words, the problem with the step function is that differences in input values are not effectively reflected in the output. Unfortunately, the sigmoid function also exhibits this issue at its extreme ends. This problem can easily occur in deep learning models that use the sigmoid function as the activation function. As shown in the diagram, the upper layers of the neural network are weighted sums of the lower layers. Since the sigmoid output is always positive, if the weights in the neural network are positive, the input values of the upper nodes will naturally be positive (the sum of positives is positive). In this case, as you move to higher layers, the input values tend to grow larger. One might think that appropriately balancing positive and negative weights to have an average of zero would solve this, but even if the average of the weights is zero, the weighted sum of the nodes' outputs is not necessarily zero. Even if it is zero, the sigmoid function will push the output back to 0.5. Thus, as you move to higher layers, the neuron output values tend to grow larger. The larger the neuron output value, the closer the sigmoid function's derivative gets to zero. As will be detailed in the backpropagation chapter, when the gradient of the sigmoid function approaches zero, the effectiveness of backpropagation learning approaches zero. When this happens, neural network learning becomes ineffective, and as the network deepens and the model grows, an ironic situation arises where the model's performance degrades. This is known as the vanishing gradient problem. Non Zero-Centered Problem And the second problem is that the sigmoid output is always positive (+). This is called the non zero-centered problem. Why is it an issue that the sigmoid output is always positive? Let's look at the learning rule of the perceptron. Here, if we assume that the input values and are the output values from the previous layer, then the signs of these two values are positive. So, if the error is positive, the changes in weights and will both be positive, and if the error is negative, the changes in weights and will both be negative. In that case, the new and can only move within the first or third quadrant. This means that the weight learning graph will show a zigzag pattern. If the optimal connection weights that need to be achieved through learning are located upward left as shown in the figure below, it would be ideal for the values of and to gradually move upward left. However, since and can only move within the first or third quadrant during the learning process, the learning process of the connection weights shows a zigzag pattern as below. The zigzag pattern ultimately means that the learning process is inefficient. In other words, learning with the sigmoid function sometimes has this inefficient characteristic. Therefore, as neural network learning theory has advanced, several other activation functions have been developed to overcome the aforementioned shortcomings of the sigmoid activation function. 5.3 Hyperbolic Tangent Function (tanh Function) The hyperbolic tangent function (tanh function) is an activation function that retains the advantages of the sigmoid function while overcoming its drawbacks. This function also has an S-shape, similar to the sigmoid function, but it returns values between -1 and 1. ​ The tanh function, unlike the sigmoid function, outputs values between -1 and 1, solving the non-zero-centered problem. This function maintains the advantages of the sigmoid function while providing more stable outputs during the learning process. Additionally, the tanh function offers faster and more accurate learning efficiency due to the larger differences in output values. However, the tanh function can still encounter the gradient vanishing problem in deep neural networks because the gradient can still approach zero at extreme values. 5.4 ReLU Activation Function The activation function that significantly addresses the gradient vanishing problem is the ReLU (Rectified Linear Unit) activation function. The ReLU function outputs the input value if it is greater than 0 and returns 0 for any input value less than or equal to 0. The ReLU function addresses the gradient vanishing problem and is therefore widely used as the default activation function in modern deep learning models. In the positive region, its gradient is always 1, preventing the gradient from vanishing and allowing effective backpropagation through deep layers of the network. Dying ReLU Problem However, the ReLU function has its drawbacks. When the input is negative, the gradient becomes 0, causing the "Dying ReLU" problem where neurons stop learning entirely. To mitigate this issue, several variations of ReLU have been developed. 5.5 Leaky ReLU (Leaky Rectified Linear Unit) Leaky ReLU is a variation of the ReLU function that assigns a small gradient to negative input values, allowing the network to learn even in the negative region. This helps to mitigate the "Dying ReLU" problem. Here, is a small constant, typically set to values like 0.01 or 0.02. This provides a very small gradient for negative inputs, preventing the gradient from vanishing entirely when the input is negative. How It Works Leaky ReLU works as follows: When the input value is greater than or equal to 0, it outputs . When the input value is less than 0, it outputs . This small slope maintains a consistent gradient in the negative region, allowing the neural network to learn across all areas. Advantages Mitigates the Dying ReLU problem: The ReLU function outputs 0 for negative input values, causing the gradient to be zero and stopping the learning process. Leaky ReLU provides a small gradient in the negative region, alleviating this issue. Maintains non-linearity: Like ReLU, Leaky ReLU maintains non-linearity, enabling the neural network to learn complex patterns. Simplicity: Leaky ReLU is simple to implement and incurs minimal computational cost. Disadvantages Optimal α value selection: Although is typically set to 0.01 or 0.02, finding the optimal value may require experimentation depending on the dataset and model. Gradient Exploding problem: Leaky ReLU does not completely solve the Gradient Exploding problem, and this issue can still occur, especially in deep neural networks. 5.6 PReLU (Parametric Rectified Linear Unit) PReLU (Parametric Rectified Linear Unit) is a generalized form of Leaky ReLU, allowing the slope of the negative region, , to be optimized during the training process. This enables the model to learn the optimal slope for the given data. The formula for PReLU is as follows: Here, is a learnable parameter. The initial value is generally set to 0.01, but it is adjusted to the optimal value through learning. How It Works PReLU works as follows: If the input value is greater than or equal to 0, it outputs . If the input value is less than 0, it outputs . Here, is a learnable parameter, optimized during model training. Unlike Leaky ReLU, the slope can be automatically adjusted to fit the dataset. Advantages Mitigates the Dying ReLU Problem: Like the ReLU function, PReLU maintains nonlinearity for positive inputs while providing a learnable slope for negative inputs, mitigating the "Dying ReLU" problem. Adaptive Slope: Unlike Leaky ReLU, PReLU can optimize the slope in the negative region during training, making it more adaptable to different datasets. Better Performance: PReLU often shows better performance as it adjusts the slope based on data, rather than using a fixed slope. Disadvantages Increased Complexity: Compared to Leaky ReLU, PReLU increases model complexity because it requires learning an additional parameter . Additional Computation Cost: Including a learnable parameter adds a slight increase in computational cost compared to Leaky ReLU. 5.7 ELU (Exponential Linear Unit) ELU (Exponential Linear Unit) is another variation of ReLU. It processes negative input values using an exponential function to promote faster and more accurate learning. ELU calculates output values in the negative region using the exponential function. The formula for ELU is as follows: Here, is a positive constant, typically set to 1. How It Works ELU works as follows: If the input is greater than or equal to 0, it outputs . If the input is less than 0, it outputs . Here, α is a constant that adjusts the curve's slope for negative input values. Advantages Mitigating the Dying ReLU Problem: ELU provides a small gradient for negative input values, which helps mitigate the "Dying ReLU" problem. Maintaining Mean Output Near 0: ELU maintains the mean output close to 0, improving the learning speed of the neural network. Speed and Accuracy Improvement: The use of the exponential function enables faster and more accurate learning. Disadvantages Additional Computational Cost: ELU uses the exponential function, which incurs higher computational costs compared to ReLU or Leaky ReLU. Hyperparameter Adjustment Needed: The value of can affect model performance and may need adjustment to fit the dataset. 5.8 Summary Activation functions are crucial for the learning efficiency and performance of neural networks. The sigmoid, tanh, and ReLU functions each have their pros and cons, and it is important to select the appropriate activation function for specific situations. The sigmoid function provides simple non-linearity but suffers from gradient vanishing and non-zero-centered issues. The tanh function addresses the non-zero-centered issue but still encounters gradient vanishing problems. The ReLU function solves the gradient vanishing problem but has the Dying ReLU issue. To address these, variations such as Leaky ReLU, PReLU, and ELU have been developed. In conclusion, there is a wide variety of activation functions, each designed to solve specific problems. There is no perfect activation function, so it is essential to understand the characteristics of each function and apply them appropriately to the given context. As new activation functions continue to emerge, we can continuously improve the performance of neural networks. Chapter 6 Gradient Descent 6.1 Definition of Gradient Descent The dictionary definition of gradient descent is as follows: Gradient descent is an optimization algorithm in machine learning and deep learning used to find the optimal values of a model's parameters given a loss function. The loss function is a crucial concept in the learning process of neural networks. It measures the difference between the model's predicted values and the actual values. The concept of the loss function is simple. For instance, it's similar to the error we discussed in previous videos. The learning process in a neural network involves reducing this error. In other words, it's about tuning all parameters repeatedly to minimize the value of the loss function. In the example shown above, the parameters could be the slope and the intercept. Adjusting these slope and intercept values to find the smallest error is the task of the loss function. 6.2 Loss Function MSE (Mean Squared Error) A representative loss function is Mean Squared Error (MSE). The formula is as follows: Here, is the actual value, is the predicted value, and is the number of data points. MSE calculates the average of the squared differences between the predicted values and the actual values for each data point. Example Data Actual values : [3, -0.5, 2, 7] Predicted values : [2.5, 0.0, 2, 8] MSE Calculation Steps Calculate the difference between each actual value and predicted value. Square each difference. Sum all the squared differences. Divide the sum by the number of data points to get the mean. Step-by-Step Calculation Calculate Differences Square the Differences Sum of Squared Differences Calculate the Mean Therefore, the MSE loss for the given example data is 0.375. MAE (Mean Absolute Error) Besides MSE, there is also MAE (Mean Absolute Error). MAE uses the absolute value instead of squaring the differences. The formula is as follows: The reason for using the absolute value is that squaring the errors can distort them. Example Data Actual values : [3, -0.5, 2, 7] Predicted values : [2.5, 0.0, 2, 8] MAE Calculation Steps Calculate the absolute difference between each actual value and predicted value. Sum all the absolute differences. Divide the sum by the number of data points to get the mean. Step-by-Step Calculation Calculate Differences Sum of Squared Differences Calculate the Mean Therefore, the MAE loss for the given example data is 0.5. Cross Entropy Another important loss function is the Cross Entropy function. The formula is as follows: Cross Entropy is a commonly used loss function in deep learning, known for its advantage of fast learning speed. Example Data Actual values : [1, 0, 1, 0] Predicted values : [0.9, 0.1, 0.8, 0.4] MAE Calculation Steps Apply the Cross Entropy formula to each pair of actual and predicted values. Sum all the individual cross entropies. Divide the sum by the number of data points to get the mean. Step-by-Step Calculation Calculate Cross Entropy for Each Pair Sum of Cross Entropies Calculate the Mean Therefore, the Cross Entropy loss for the given example data is 0.2362. 6.3 Gradient Descent Definition of Gradient Descent Gradient Descent is an optimization algorithm used in machine learning and deep learning to find the optimal values of the model parameters that minimize a given loss function. The concept of gradient descent is surprisingly simple. Let's consider using the following loss function (MSE): To understand gradient descent, let's simplify the problem to a single data point (N=1): Then, the loss function becomes a familiar quadratic function formula. Moreover, the point where the error is minimized can be easily identified at a glance. While a human eye can instantly spot the point where the error is minimized, unfortunately, machines cannot do this. However, there is one crucial fact to note: the point where the error is minimized is always where the slope of the tangent is zero. Therefore, gradient descent works by calculating the gradient at a point , then increasing , if the gradient is negative and decreasing if the gradient is positive. The larger the gradient, the greater the change, and the closer the gradient is to zero, the smaller the change. This method gradually finds the point where the gradient approaches zero. When reaches this point, the error is minimized. Mathematical Expression According to the Taylor approximation: Thus, for the loss function (C) and weights : To maximize that is, to maximize the change in loss, or in other words, to descend as quickly as possible to the minimum point, The change in weights must be equal to the gradient. Therefore, the mathematical expression for gradient descent is as follows: where represents the weights, is the learning rate, and is the gradient of the loss function. represents the gradient at a given point, and is calculated as , meaning it has the same magnitude but the opposite direction of the gradient. Therefore, rewriting gradient descent in terms of weight change with respect to the loss function, we can express it with the familiar gradient descent formula as follows: We will explore a concrete example of gradient descent in conjunction with backpropagation in the next chapter. 6.4 Summary Gradient Descent is an optimization algorithm used in machine learning and deep learning to find the optimal parameters of a model by minimizing the loss function. The loss function measures the difference between the model's predicted values and the actual values, with common examples being MSE, MAE, and cross-entropy. Gradient Descent works by calculating the gradient of the loss function and iteratively updating the parameters to move towards the point where the gradient is zero, indicating a minimum. Mathematically, this involves increasing the parameters when the gradient is negative and decreasing them when it is positive. This process is repeated until the loss function is minimized, enhancing the performance of the deep learning model. Chapter 7 Backpropagation Algorithm 7.1 Background of Backpropagation Algorithm From the 1960s to the early 1980s, research in artificial neural networks focused on shallow networks like the single-layer perceptron. However, training deep networks, such as multilayer perceptrons, was a challenging problem until the development of the backpropagation algorithm. In 1986, researchers David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams introduced the backpropagation algorithm. This breakthrough enabled the training of deep networks and remains one of the most widely used learning algorithms in deep learning. 7.2 Necessity of the Backpropagation Algorithm To understand the necessity of the backpropagation algorithm, let’s consider the MNIST dataset. MNIST consists of 70,000 handwritten digit images, each with 28x28 pixels, resulting in 784 data points per image. Suppose we want to build a neural network model to recognize these digits with the following structure: Input layer: 784 neurons Hidden layer: 100 neurons Output layer: 10 neurons In this case, the number of connection weights would be 79,400, and the number of biases would be 110 (100 for the hidden layer + 10 for the output layer). To compute the loss for one image, we would need 79,400 operations just for the weights. Updating one parameter would require 4,764,000,000 operations, and since we need to update each parameter individually, the total number of operations would be 380 trillion. Assuming a CPU processing speed of 850 million operations per second (based on an i7-8750H), updating the weights of a 3-layer neural network once would take 123 hours. Given that finding the optimal weights requires hundreds or thousands of iterations, it’s clear that without the backpropagation algorithm, the modern era of deep learning and artificial intelligence would never have been possible. 7.3 Backpropagation Let's delve into the backpropagation algorithm. To grasp its core concepts, let's consider a simple multilayer neural network. Suppose we have a neural network with the following structure: Let's consider a simple multilayer neural network with the following structure: Input layer: 2 neurons Hidden layer: 2 neurons Output layer: 1 neuron Input values: and Hidden layer weights: , for the first neuron and , for the second neuron Output layer weights: , We will use the sigmoid function as the activation function and Mean Squared Error (MSE) as the loss function. We will initialize all weights randomly and set the learning rate to 0.1. Now we are ready to begin. Training a neural network using backpropagation can be divided into three main steps. Repeating steps 1 to 3 to find the optimal parameters is known as the training or optimization process. Steps of Backpropagation Step1: Forward Pass The forward pass is straightforward. Given the input values, the process is as follows, Multiply the input values by the connection weights and and sum them to get the hidden layer node . Similarly, multiply the input values by the connection weights and and sum them to get the hidden layer node . Next, the hidden layer nodes pass through the activation function. Next, the product of the connection weights and is summed and passed to the output layer neuron . Finally, the sigmoid function of the output layer is applied to compute the final output value. This completes the forward propagation. Step 2: Loss Calculation To calculate the loss, we use the MSE formula as follows: Since we have only one output neuron, we simplify the formula by setting to 1. We substitute the predicted value and the actual value to calculate the error . This results in an error of 0.125. Step 3: Backpropagation First, let's update the weight using backpropagation. In the previous chapter, we looked at the weight update formula using gradient descent. For , it is as follows: Therefore, to update , we need to calculate the derivative . However, since we cannot directly find , we use a trick known as the Chain Rule. Chain Rule The chain rule is the key to the backpropagation algorithm. When we need to find the derivative between two variables but do not know their direct relationship, we can extend using the known derivatives step by step. By solving each part, we can eventually solve the whole problem. Because by eliminating each variable in sequence, we are left with the relationship we need to find. The mathematical proof of the chain rule can be quite challenging, but understanding the concept of the chain rule is not difficult. For example, let's consider the following problem: "A cheetah is twice as fast as a lion, a lion is twice as fast as a bear, and a bear is 1.5 times faster than a human. How many times faster is a cheetah than a human?" Then we can conclude that the cheetah is 6 times faster than a human. This illustrates the concept of the chain rule. Using this property of the chain rule, we can break down the changes in weight and the loss into parts and calculate them. This is the core idea of the backpropagation algorithm. Let's calculate each part step by step. First, we'll find / . Differentiating this equation with respect to , we get the following. Given that the value of is 0.646, substituting this into the equation yields = -0.71. Now, the next step is to calculate . During the forward pass, we used the following sigmoid function. The mathematical formula for the sigmoid function is as follows. In our case, we can express it using and . By substituting the variables in this way, and skipping the complex differentiation process, the derivative of the sigmoid function with respect to can be simply expressed as follows. Then, since the value of was 0.646, we can easily calculate the derivative of the sigmoid with respect to . Next, let's calculate the third term, Next, the third term is simple. Since , taking the partial derivative of with respect to gives . Since was calculated as 0.615 during the forward pass, we can now use this value to find . Then, according to the weight update formula of the gradient descent algorithm, We substitute -0.1 for the gradient, the current weight 0.55, and set the learning rate to 0.1 as follows. Then the new weight for becomes 0.56. Now it's 's turn. Using the chain rule, we can calculate it as follows: However, the part is the same as calculated before. So we substitute these values as follows: And the third term is similarly calculated using the following formula: We find that . Substituting all the values, we can calculate: = -0.095. Therefore, according to the weight update formula of gradient descent, Given that the gradient is -0.095, the current weight is 0.45, and the learning rate is 0.1, we can substitute these values: Thus, the new weight becomes 0.4595. Now that the weights in the second layer have been updated, let's move on to the first layer. is also subject to the chain rule. Now, can be expressed as follows. And since has already been calculated, we can reuse the value from our previous calculation. And the term can be reused from our previous calculation of , according to the following equation. Then can be written as follows. And is the derivative of the sigmoid function, so it can be calculated using the value of obtained during the forward pass. Finally, can be found using the formula for . The last term becomes the input value . If we plug in these values and calculate, we find that is -0.0106. Therefore, the remaining task is to update the weight. By applying the weight update formula, we calculate that the new becomes 0.7010. In the same manner, we can calculate , , and . Weight Update for Weight Update for Weight Update for In this manner, we can update each of the weights accordingly. Then, let's verify if the error of the neural network has decreased through this backpropagation algorithm. We will input the same values again and see the results. Then, the sigmoid values and are as follows. Then, the value of is as follows. Then, the final output value is as follows. Then, the loss function value is as follows. This error value is smaller than the previous error of 0.1250, indicating that the error has decreased. From now on, we repeat the following steps: 1) feedforward, 2) loss calculation, and 3) backpropagation, until the error reaches a minimum. At that point, the training can be stopped. 7.4 Backpropagation Example Code import numpy as np# Sigmoid activation functiondef sigmoid(x): return 1 / (1 + np.exp(-x))# Derivative of the sigmoid functiondef sigmoid_derivative(x): return x * (1 - x)# Mean Squared Error loss functiondef mse_loss(y_true, y_pred): return np.mean((y_true - y_pred) ** 2)# Generate training datadef gen_training_data(data_points): x1 = np.random.random(data_points) x2 = np.random.random(data_points) y = ((x1 + x2) > 1).astype(int) # Points above the line x1 + x2 = 1 are labeled 1, others 0 X = np.column_stack((x1, x2)) return X, y# Initialize parametersnp.random.seed(42)input_nodes = 2hidden_nodes = 2output_nodes = 1learning_rate = 0.1epochs = 10000# Weights and biases initializationw_ih = np.random.rand(input_nodes, hidden_nodes)w_ho = np.random.rand(hidden_nodes, output_nodes)b_h = np.random.rand(hidden_nodes)b_o = np.random.rand(output_nodes)# Training dataX, y = gen_training_data(100)y = y.reshape(-1, 1)# Training the MLPfor epoch in range(epochs): # Forward pass hidden_input = np.dot(X, w_ih) + b_h hidden_output = sigmoid(hidden_input)final_input = np.dot(hidden_output, w_ho) + b_o final_output = sigmoid(final_input)# Compute loss loss = mse_loss(y, final_output)# Backpropagation error = y - final_output d_final_output = error * sigmoid_derivative(final_output)error_hidden_layer = d_final_output.dot(w_ho.T) d_hidden_output = error_hidden_layer * sigmoid_derivative(hidden_output)# Update weights and biases w_ho += hidden_output.T.dot(d_final_output) * learning_rate b_o += np.sum(d_final_output, axis=0) * learning_ratew_ih += X.T.dot(d_hidden_output) * learning_rate b_h += np.sum(d_hidden_output, axis=0) * learning_rateif epoch % 1000 == 0: print(f"Epoch {epoch}, Loss: {loss}")# Testing the MLPtest_data, test_labels = gen_training_data(10)test_labels = test_labels.reshape(-1, 1)hidden_input = np.dot(test_data, w_ih) + b_hhidden_output = sigmoid(hidden_input)final_input = np.dot(hidden_output, w_ho) + b_ofinal_output = sigmoid(final_input)print("Test Predictions:")print(final_output)print("Test Labels:")print(test_labels) Code Explanation: Sigmoid function and its derivative: sigmoid(x): Sigmoid activation function. sigmoid_derivative(x): Derivative of the sigmoid function, necessary for the backpropagation process. Loss function: mse_loss(y_true, y_pred): Mean Squared Error (MSE) loss function. Generating training data: gen_training_data(data_points): Generates input data and labels. Initializing parameters: Define the number of input nodes, hidden nodes, output nodes, learning rate, and number of epochs. Initialize weights (w_ih, w_ho) and biases (b_h, b_o). Training process: Perform forward pass and backpropagation for each epoch. Forward pass: Calculate the output of the hidden layer and the output layer using input data. Calculate loss: Compute the error between the output and the actual values. Backpropagation: Calculate the error for the output layer and the hidden layer, then update weights and biases. MLP testing: Generate new test data and output the MLP's predictions. This code helps in understanding the training process and backpropagation steps of a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP). By printing the loss value for each epoch, you can track the progress of the training process. 7.5 Summary The backpropagation algorithm, developed by David E. Rumelhart, Geoffrey E. Hinton, and Ronald J. Williams in 1986, is a crucial technique that made the training of deep neural networks, such as multi-layer perceptrons, possible. Backpropagation calculates the error between the neural network's output and the actual value and then uses this error to adjust the weights of each layer through the chain rule. When training on large datasets like the MNIST dataset, the backpropagation algorithm is essential. The algorithm involves calculating the output through a forward pass, computing the error using a loss function, and then updating the weights through backpropagation. By repeating this process, the algorithm gradually reduces the error, finding the optimal weights and enabling the neural network to solve complex problems. Without the backpropagation algorithm, the advancements in deep learning and artificial intelligence that we see today would not have been possible. Chapter 8 Applications of Neural Networks Neural networks are widely used in various fields, and their applications are expanding. Here, we'll look at some typical uses of neural networks and explain their usefulness and effectiveness through real-life examples. 8.1 Examples of Neural Network Applications in Various Fields Image Recognition Medical Image Analysis: Neural networks are used to diagnose diseases in medical images. For example, using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to analyze MRI or X-ray images can help detect cancer and other diseases early. CNNs are effective at learning spatial structures in images, resulting in high accuracy in medical image analysis. Autonomous Driving: Autonomous vehicles use CNNs to recognize road signs, pedestrians, other vehicles, and more. This helps determine safe driving routes and prevent collisions. For instance, Tesla's autonomous driving system analyzes road situations in real-time and controls the vehicle's movement. Speech Recognition Virtual Assistants: Speech recognition technology plays a crucial role in virtual assistants like Siri, Google Assistant, and Alexa. Using neural networks, it converts user speech into text and executes commands based on it. This technology significantly enhances user convenience, allowing various tasks to be performed through voice commands. Medical Records: When doctors record patient conditions verbally, neural networks can convert it into text and store it in electronic medical record systems. This enhances the efficiency of medical staff and helps accurately document patient conditions." Natural Language Processing, NLP Chatbots: Chatbots are commonly used in customer service, processing natural conversations through neural networks. For instance, they provide appropriate answers to user questions and retrieve necessary information. Widely used in sectors like banking and e-commerce, they enable 24-hour customer support. Translation: NLP-based neural networks perform translations between various languages. Google Translate, for example, uses neural networks to understand the meaning of sentences and accurately translate them into other languages. This facilitates smooth international communication and helps break down language barriers. 8.2 Real-life Cases AlphaGo Google DeepMind's AlphaGo is an artificial intelligence that plays the game of Go, combining neural networks and reinforcement learning algorithms to defeat top human Go players. AlphaGo's success demonstrated the exceptional performance of neural networks in complex strategy games. By learning from millions of Go game records, AlphaGo improved its ability to play Go on its own. Facebook Face Recognition Facebook uses neural networks to recognize and tag faces in user photos, enhancing user experience and providing automatic photo organization features. Facebook's DeepFace algorithm achieves a face recognition accuracy of 97%, nearly equivalent to human recognition capabilities. Google Translate Google Translate has significantly improved translation quality by introducing a neural network-based translation system. This system understands context and provides more natural translations. Neural network-based translation models consider the flow and context of sentences, translating at the sentence level rather than word by word. 8.3 Conclusion and Future Challenges Neural networks demonstrate outstanding performance in various application areas, making our lives more convenient. However, there are still challenges that need to be addressed. Future research will focus on further improving the performance of neural networks and exploring new application areas. The potential of neural networks is vast, and innovative technologies utilizing them will continue to emerge. I hope this book aids in your understanding and utilization of neural networks, and I wish you great success in your future research and learning endeavors. Acknowledgement Many people have helped make this book possible. First, I want to express my deep gratitude to my family. Their constant support and encouragement allowed me to finish this book. I also want to thank my research institution and colleagues. Their professional advice and feedback have made this book more complete. Finally, I am grateful to all the readers who will explore new knowledge about artificial intelligence and neural networks through this book. I hope this book will be a small help on your learning journey. Resources In addition to the content covered in this book, here are some valuable resources for further exploration: - Books: 'Deep Learning' by Ian Goodfellow, 'Hands-On Machine Learning with Scikit-Learn, Keras, and TensorFlow' by Aurélien Géron - Websites: Coursera, Kaggle, TensorFlow - Online Courses: 'Deep Learning Specialization' by Andrew Ng on Coursera, 'Machine Learning' by Stanford University on Coursera These resources will enhance your learning experience and provide additional support as you dive deeper into the world of neural networks and deep learning. Reader Feedback Your feedback is incredibly valuable to me. I encourage you to share your thoughts, suggestions, and experiences using the following channels: Email: Send your feedback directly to fusionlab.ai@gmail.com Youtube Channel: Visit my official Youtube Channel at https://www.youtube.com/@EZlearnAI23 By sharing your feedback, you help me make this book even better and more useful for future readers. I look forward to hearing from you and continuing this learning journey together. About The Author Kilho Shin, PhD Kilho Shin is an enthusiastic AI Engineer with a passion for making complex concepts accessible and fun. He earned his PhD from the University of Southern California, where he delved deep into the fascinating world of artificial intelligence. Now, Kilho brings his expertise to life as an AI Engineer, working on innovative projects and pushing the boundaries of technology.Kilho loves teaching difficult and dense subjects in an easy and engaging way. When he's not tinkering with neural networks or teaching machines to learn, you might find Kilho exploring new tech gadgets, playing board games, or sharing his latest AI discoveries on his popular YouTube channel. Kilho's dedication to making AI approachable and exciting shines through in his writing, making even the most challenging topics enjoyable to read. Join him on this journey into the incredible world of neural networks and deep learning!